>> Steve: Good morning.
Welcome to session 318, Using Xray
and DTrace for In-Depth Analysis.
My name is Steve Lewallen, and I'm the Performance
Tools Manager within developer technologies at Apple.
And this is our last installment of a three part series
really this week on Tracing with Xray and DTrace.
So in today's agenda, we're going to
do a quick overview of Xray and DTrace
in case any of you missed any of the other sessions.
Then we're going to go over building
custom DTrace instruments in Xray.
We'll take a slight turn and then we'll discuss alternate
ways to use Xray other than the normal double click it
in the finder, etc. Those ways include using quick
start keys, which is a point and shoot mechanism,
a command line Xray and remote tracing with Xray and DTrace.
Finally, we're going to talk about inserting
DTrace static probes into your code.
So let's quickly do an Xray review.
As you may recall, when you start Xray
you're presented with a template chooser.
And the template chooser has templates that are subsets of
instruments geared towards solving a particular problem.
If you don't want to apply instruments in that manner, you
can go to the Xray Instrument Library and choose instruments
from there and apply them to your document.
In other case, we then set up your instruments if they
have any other settings that you need to configure,
we try our best to have good defaults,
but you may want to fiddle with those.
And finally, you pick a target, what do
you want to trace and gather data on?
Record it, you gather the date and you use the
different facilities in Xray to mine the data.
Go in to a call tree view, inverting it,
filtering out different libraries, etcetera.
That's a very quick overview of Xray.
So now let's move on to an overview of DTrace.
So DTrace is a dynamic tracing framework that
Sun developed and open sourced on Solaris.
Over the past year we have take it, imported
it to our Intel and power PC platforms.
It's a zero disabled cost tracing mechanism.
It's always there, but until you use it,
you're not really paying a cost for it.
After you're done using it, again,
you're not paying a cost for it again.
Its system wide, so it's available in the kernel on up and
it's on all of our installs, whether that's a user install,
a developer tools install, or the server.
And it's scriptable.
It's scriptable using the D language.
This language, when you write it, create a script with it,
is compiled down to byte code and interpreted in the kernel.
Therefore, it's designed to be very
tight and compact, safe and performant.
So it actually doesn't have loop
structures, for example, or branching.
You can't define your own user functions or call
out to user space, but it is still very powerful.
Even variable declarations are optional.
It's very dynamic.
You just kind of go with the flow as you
do with a lot of scripting languages.
So it all centers around the concept of a probe.
This defines the events that you're
interested in finding information about.
And you can describe product kits or
conditions upon which the probe fires,
the actions which should be taken when that happens.
And to get a list of available probes on the system,
you can use the DTrace command line
option, -l. So how does DTrace work?
Well, whether you have a DTrace script or you have created a
DTrace instrument in Xray, that probe is sent to Lib DTrace
and compiled down to byte code and sent on
to the kernel to the DTrace virtual machine.
The DTrace Virtual Machine analyzes that and attaches it
to the various providers that you've specified interest in.
If those providers have information to send back, they do
so back through the virtual machine, back through Lib DTrace
and out to either the console,
if you ran from the command line,
or through the DTrace instrument and on to the Xray UI.
So that's a quick overview of both Xray and DTrace.
Now let's move on to building custom
instruments in Xray with DTrace.
Why would you want to do this?
Well, you know your own code and you can create
domain specific probe points for your own code.
Maybe you have a database and you want to
track begin and end transaction or something.
You can also tailor this for different tasks.
You could be bug hunting, so you're just varying your
scripts, looking for different bugs, following your nose.
Perhaps your creating an aggression test suite such
that you would run a set of DTrace instruments in Xray
to gather general performance data
of your app before each release
to see how memory use has grown or
shrunk and performance, etcetera.
Or perhaps you're a network administrator who is
creating scripts to monitor system on the network.
Now what you see before you now is
the DTrace Instrument Builder in Xray.
To use it, the first thing you need to
do is actually describe your instrument.
You give it a name, a category, you can use one
of your own or ours, and a good description.
Now you should make sure that you use good key words
in these fields because this represents your instrument
in the library, the Xray Library
we just saw during the Xray review.
And if someone searches in that library, they'll
hit your keywords if you've chosen appropriately.
So the next thing you want to do
is define the body of your probe.
You get a chance up front to declare any global
variables, structures, etcetera, you may want to use,
and you also get a chance in the begin section
to do any initialization or any preflighting.
And then you come to the body of
your instrument, your probe.
So the first thing you want to do is describe
the conditions upon which your probe should fire.
That could be oh, I want it to fire
every second at some frequency.
Or it could be I want it to fire whenever the foo function
is entered and a first argument is between values A
and values B, and you can extend
that predicate mechanism further.
Next you get a chance to take some action.
Now an action that we use is called recording data.
And when you record data that means you're sending it from
kernel and out of DTrace to Xray for display to the user.
A DTrace probe actually has all sorts of data that
it could send, it has the arguments to the functions
that you're probing in return values, it has DTrace
variables that DTrace provides, such as the process ID,
the user ID, current working directory of what's
being traced, etcetera, and then you have global data
in the kernel and your processes that you could access.
Now before you return data back to Xray, if you've
chosen to do so, you can do some marshalling.
In this extremely trivial example, let's say that when
the probe fired, the field my integer was of value zero.
It would be incremented by the value of one and
then one would be returned from DTrace out to Xray.
And finally you get a chance to do any post
flighting, any clean up that you wish to do.
So let's go to a demo and see how would use the
DTrace Builder in Xray to build a custom instrument.
So what I want to do, is I want to build a small
instrument that will measure the CPU load on my system
and graph it appropriately in the track view.
So I'm going to open Xray now and I'll
select a blank template and I'm going to go
to the Instrument Menu and select Build New Instrument.
So the first thing that I need
to do is describe my instrument
So I'll say CPU load and I'll put it in the system category.
That's where I put sampler and all
of those other types of instruments.
And I'll say measures average CPU load.
All right.
Now I said that I wanted to have this CPU Load Graph.
What I want to do is I want to emit CPU load
every second so I get a nice, even graph.
So I'll go to my provider types here
and I'll select the profile provider.
This is a frequency provider, so it
can do things at various frequencies.
I want to do it every one second.
Now I need to actually gather the data that
I'm going to use to graph the CPU load.
Now don't worry if you can't see
this, or it's not very clear,
we're going to describe it in slides later, in detail.
But basically, I'm accessing a kernel variable and
stuffing it in the local data variable load one.
So the next thing I want to do is actually emit
that and record it so it's sent back to Xray.
So I'll go and I'll say record data.
It's a custom type.
And I will use the load one variable I have
there in my script, and I'll give it a name.
This name is going to represent it in
the detail view and the graph as well.
I'll just say CPU load average and
I'll give it the type of integer.
So now I've described my instrument,
I've specified a provider to use,
that one second frequency profile provider probe, and I've
gathered my data and emitted it, sent it back to Xray.
Now I hit OK.
Now I want to actually configure my instrument so I get
the kind of graph style that I want in the Track View.
I'm going to go to the inspector
in the instrument and click on it
and I'll select type, sorry, I'll
select style of block graph.
That'll give me a nice, even, incremental, thick block
graph that you can see back in the back of the room.
And now I'm going to select the statistic I want to graph.
So by default, whether it is implicit or explicit, Xray will
list all numeric values it sees coming from that script.
In this case, we were emitting the
CPU load average, so I have it here.
So that's what I'm going to use to do my graph.
I'll hit Done and now I'll go and I'll choose a target.
Now this is the CPU load of the whole machine, so there
really isn't a target, so we'll say all processes.
So I'll go back to the target chooser and I'll say
all processes and now I'll use the record button
in the upper left to gather some data and I'll go
to the terminal and just exercise the machine a bit.
Do a few things.
Hit control C and then I'll go back to Xray.
We can zoom in on the data, I hit stop, and there's an
example of building a custom DTrace instrument in Xray.
So now let's look at the details of how we did that.
Let's quit the demo there and we'll go back to the slides.
So, what I wanted to do was to emit the CPU load
every second, so I used the profile provider,
which is a frequency based provider, to do that.
I fetched the data from a global
variable in the kernel called ABE and Run.
This is actually a variable that is
known in various flavors of UNIX.
You can actually learn more about it on the web, on various
flavors, and discussions about how best to compute it,
but the kernel essentially puts the one minute, five
minute and fifteen minute load average into this variable.
We access that variable with a little
scoping operator called backquote.
You put that just before the global variable.
That tells DTrace hey, I have a
variable here, but it's not in my script.
Look outside for it.
And finally we stuff the computation of the load
into the load one variable and emitted it back
to Xray and we had that nice, pretty graph.
So that was a demo of building a custom instrument.
Now remember, the scope operators.
There are two of them actually in that demo.
One was the back slash to access data outside of
the script itself, in the kernel in this case.
And the second was this scope operator.
Now using the this scope operator is a clause local
scoping and it's just the best practice in case
that variable would be declared
somewhere else in the script,
you can make sure that it's only known within that probe.
So now let's take a bit of a turn and let's
talk about alternate ways to invoke Xray outside
of the common way of double clicking the finder.
Various of these ways may fit certain circumstances you may
find yourself in and just may be darn convenient for you.
So the first alternate way to invoke
Xray is called using quick start keys.
This is a way to instantly invoke
a template, its instruments,
to start tracing a given process,
even when Xray isn't running.
So why is this so great?
Well, it's convenient.
You don't need to go all the way to the finder and then
developer tools, applications, launch a performance tool
like Xray, set it up and then trace something.
But it also can be a necessity in certain circumstances,
for example, you may have an app that begins to malfunction.
And it does so but because perhaps it's stomping on
memory, and if you deactivate it, you go to the finder
and therefore it goes to the background, then it may
sort of put, that action may so perturb the target app
that it actually crashes on you and you don't get
any opportunity to see what was going on whatsoever.
Or it could that it's simply gone completely nuts and it's
using so many CPU cycles that it makes it very painful
to go back to the finder and wait a bit and load up
your application and set it up and trace it, etcetera.
So it's always convenient to use Quick
Start Keys, sometimes it's a necessity.
So let's take a demo look at that.
All right.
I'll close the terminal here.
The first thing I want to do is set up my templates.
So I will go to Xray preferences and I will select
the Quick Start panel and enter a global hot key.
I can assign a global hot key to any template, whether it's
templates that are built into Xray or custom templates.
In this case, I'm going to say control option
command S should launch the CPU sampler template.
And I will close the preferences
and I will quit the application.
And now if you've attended WWDC in the last few years
and if you continue to do so and go to my sessions,
you're going to learn that I don't miss
an opportunity to show off my daughter,
who I'm so proud of, and this isn't an exception.
So I have this little app, it's called Baby Viewer.
And these are pictures of my daughter.
A cheap attempt for, yeah, so this app deactivates,
stops working when I make it go to the background
because there's no point in eating up
GPU, CPU cycles if no one's looking at it.
So how would I trace that?
Well, I'd use that Quick Start Key.
So I'll activate the app again, and
now I'm going to hit my global hot key.
Control Option Command S. Now Xray
wasn't running, but now it is.
It started in the background and is
actually tracing this application,
which is incrementing these files about once a second.
Now to stop this, I can just point at
the application again and stop the trace.
And if I quite the app, we see that we have sampled
the app at the even increment that we expect to.
So that's just a convenient, easy way to use Xray.
So let's go back to the slides.
And let's review, actually, how we did
that, actually move the demo up here.
So you use the Xray Preferences Panel to assign a
global hot key to any template, whether it's your own
or custom templates or built in
templates or custom templates.
The only caveat here is that all
the instruments in the template have
to have the ability to attach to a running process.
Now that actually happens to be just
about all the instruments that we have.
Any instrument you build with DTrace, object alloc and
links, for example, need to trace only launched processes.
So you can choose to run with the UI or headless.
So let's say you like to take traces but you don't want the
UI to pop up, you just want to look at the data later on.
You can do so by going to the first
preferences panel in Xray
and changing the default location
for where documents are saved.
And then you can set a time out, say five seconds, and
then you can trace something and you'll hear a beep,
it will trace it for five seconds, you'll hear another beep
and then the document will be placed
in a location you specified.
So again, all you do is you move your pointer to a
window that is owned by the process you wish to trace,
you hit your global hot key you've
assigned, that starts the trace,
and if you want to stop the trace,
you repeat the whole process.
You point the pointer, your mouse pointer, at
a window owned by the process you want to trace
and you hit it again and that stops the trace.
So we've seen the demo, so let's move on.
So, and another alternate way to use
Xray is view the Xray command line.
Now you can find out information
about that from the Xray man page.
And you can use this with either a
trace template, one that we created
or one that you create for yourself, or a trace document.
It can already have lots of runs in it
and you can just add a new run to it.
And you can use this to launch
or attach to an existing process.
If you're launching a process, you can provide built in
command line arguments and environment variables, etcetera,
to change the behavior of the app
you're interesting in launching.
To terminate it you can specify a time out.
Say you wanted to sample it for five seconds
or look at file activity for five seconds.
You can do that with the -l Option.
You can also just hit control C in the terminal
and that will just stop the trace
and the document will be written out.
And finally you could also just wait for the process to end.
In any event, you'll be told when the
trace ends where the document was saved to.
Moving on, this is an often requested feature
and our first step towards this is the
ability to trace something remotely with Xray.
So the first step towards this is to allow you to export
DTrace from Xray and run it on another machine or locally
on the command line and then import the data that results
back into Xray and use the GUI to look up that data.
So why would you want to do this?
Well, Xray isn't available on all systems.
It's only a developer install.
But DTrace is available on all machines, a user
install, a developer install, Leopard server.
You can also use this to take advantage of a
feature in DTrace called anonymous tracing.
So you could construct a script in DTrace,
in DTrace instruments in Xray, export that,
install the resulting script in the kernel, reboot,
and then get that primordial trace data well
before you even get to the log in window.
And then check that data out and
then import it back into Xray.
So his would be useful, obviously for us back at Apple,
but if you were a device driver
writer, this would also be very useful.
And finally you can just use this feature to learn
about how we build DTrace scripts in our instruments,
when you manipulate the GUI, what happens.
You can take a look at the existing instruments
that we ship with Xray that are in DTrace.
And just learn about scripting and probe construction.
So to do this, you start out with a trace
document populated only by DTrace instruments.
Obviously we can't create a DTrace script for say the
object alloc instrument or UR Recorder instrument.
Next, you use the export menu from the file
menu bar menu and so long as all the instruments
in your document are DTrace based,
this menu item will be enabled.
So you select it and you provide a name for your script.
You also have to tell us what you're going to
trace, what type of target you're going to trace.
Whether it's all processes, the system, like we say
with the CPU demo or it's a target you will launch
from DTrace using the DTrace -c
option, or it's an existing process.
And we need to know this because you slightly
modify DTrace script with different macros,
etcetera, based on how you're going to use it.
So once you do that and you've run DTrace with that
script, you can import the data back into Xray.
Now, one caveat there is you have to remember to import it
back to a trace document in Xray that is of the same form
that you use to export the script to begin with
so that it has the exact same DTrace instruments.
Now otherwise, we wouldn't know how to match up the
incoming data with the actual instruments you specified.
Now we do our best to determine if there's incompatibility
between the trace document you have and what you're trying
to import will alert you to that and we will stop the
trace, but if you get adventurous and you start tinkering
with that script and then you generate data and try
to import it back in, results will be unpredictable.
So let's go to a demo of that now.
So what I'm going to do is launch Xray again.
And I'll select a blank template once again.
Since we're familiar with it, I'm
going to use the CPU load instrument.
So I will type in CPU, there's my new CPU Load
instrument that we did strictly with DTrace.
And now I'll go to the file menu
and say DTrace script export.
And let's just show where that will go.
I'll put it in the home user account.
I'm going to give it a target of all processes
since it was the CPU load measuring instrument.
I'll say cpu.d. And I'll save that
and now I'm going to open up terminal.
And let's resize this a bit.
And first, let's just take a look at that script so this
is basically what you get on this very, very simple script.
It has a header.
It emits a UID, for example, that we use to
try to match up instruments with the data.
And then we see the probe that we used.
We used a profile probe firing every one second.
And that probe is gathering kernel
level data and emitting it.
Now back to Xray.
Now, this script is a bit different than the script
that we used when we controlled the whole widget.
When we have defined it in Xray and when we run it in Xray.
When we run it from Xray, we have the opportunity to get
back to data and binary format, we mark up the script.
There's certain pieces of information.
In case you made an error, we can tell you
more about the context of that error, etcetera.
When you run something from DTrace itself, it's all text
based, so the script is just a little bit different.
But essentially, it's functioning in
the same way, probing the same things.
So, let's go and run that.
I need to run DTrace's root, so I'll say pseudo dtrace
-S, my script and I want to output this data
to a file so I can import that file back.
So I'll say cpu.out.
I need to use a .o there to do that.
All right.
And now I'll hit enter and, whoa, it's warning me.
Hang on. Okay.
Now I have authenticated.
And let's give the CPU something to do.
Run everything in slash again.
And that's enough.
Control C that.
Close the terminal window.
And now to terminate the trace, I'll just hit
control C. And we can briefly look at this data.
Again, it's data that was, excuse me, taken
once a second, so it's not very voluminous.
It's all text based.
We see lots of stack traces, etcetera.
I could have turned off stack tracing if
I wanted to when I built the instrument.
And now let's import that data back into the instrument.
I have my trace document again and it has
the instrument that was used to export it.
I'll go under the file menu to DTrace data
import and I'll select cpu.out this time
and it imports the data and there we have our load.
And I can expand that out and change the style to block
graph and there we have an example of running DTrace outside
of Xray based on Xray instruments
and then importing it again.
So if we can go back to the slides.
So this can be very useful, again, if you
need to look at something on another machine.
We've had various system administrators
ask for this feature.
If you need to look at something on a
user install that you don't have Xray on,
you don't have the developer tools
installed on, and it's just very useful.
So now I'd like to invite up Dave Payne
to talk to you about DTrace static probes.
( Applause )
>> Dave: Thank you, Steve.
So to give you an idea of DTrace static probes, I'd
first like to paint the context of the categories
of different DTrace providers out there so you can see how
static probes compare to the other probes on the system.
Then we'll take a look at adding static probes to a project
and then look at some examples of using static probes.
So I like to split the DTrace providers on
the system into three primary categories.
The system wider providers, the per process providers,
and the user LAN static providers
that we'll be talking about here.
So let's take a look at each one of these.
By the system wide providers, I'm referring to those
where we've put the probe points into the kernel.
In these cases, the provider name when you're
using these probes does not include a process ID.
So many of these you'll have seen in examples.
For example, so first off, the column on the left
here is the name that the DTrace system uses.
The column in the middle is a more
human readable name that we use
in the Xray instrument builder, if you want to use these.
So a few primary examples, the SysCall provider is the
interface between your applications and the kernel.
So you can watch all of the entries and returns from System
Calls and get an idea of their arguments and return values.
But the probe point for that is in the kernel.
FBT is the function boundary tracing inside the kernel.
So you can actually see the activity
that's going on within the kernel itself,
which could be helpful if you're a
device driver writer, for example.
The Proc Provider gives the kernel's view of the creation
of, the creation of termination of processes and threads
and it also informs you of signal
delivery and signal handling activity.
And the profile and tick providers, as you saw Steve
exercise, you do periodic activities in a DTrace script.
So there's a couple of others that
we've recently implemented that we don't
yet have in the Xray instrument builder, but you can go to
custom and just specify the name lock stats for VM info.
So I mentioned that these are system wide, but a
lot of times you're just interesting in one process
and you don't want to put the overhead
of having these hit by every process,
so to do that you can put the process ID in a predicate.
You can compare the executable name or
the process ID against the variables
that DTrace provides for you to use in your scripts.
The process providers let you put probe
points into your application code itself,
into your applications, your libraries, your plugin modules.
These are, let you probe functions or Objective-C Methods.
You can specify entry or return or offsets
within a function, or even an absolute address.
To use these, you must specify a process ID.
The primary provider that Sun implemented
in OpenSolaris was the PID Provider,
but we've also implemented another
one, the Objective-C Provider.
And I'll show you the difference here.
So with the PID provider, you have a probe name of the
form provider name module, which would be your library
or executable name, the function name and then
an actual name, which would be entry or return.
So for example, if I want to trace all the NSLog function
calls, now that's implemented in foundations,
which is a Cocoa Library, but it's a C Function essentially.
So I could say pid273:foundation
is the module, NSLog:entry.
Whereas for Objective-C provider, it's the provider
name followed by the class name, the method name,
which can be a class or an instance method,
and then again the name entry or return.
So if we want to trace all allocations of NS Strings,
I can use OBJC Process ID 1017, colon
NSString colon plus alloc star.
I'm using the wildcard of star here because the
method that's actually called is alloc with zone.
And then again I want the entries there.
With this, if you wanted to, if you had a method name
that you wanted to examine that was colon separated,
you would need to use a question mark
or an asterisk wild card to be able
to specify that in that third method field there.
So how does user LAN static providers compare?
Well these are probes that you can put into
your own code that have meaning within your code
and are no necessarily tied to the names
of any particular functions or methods.
So these can be semantically meaningful points
The advantage of that is that if you're changing
the implementation of your application over time
so that you function names or method
names change, these are nice and stable.
You're DTrace scripts and your Xray
instruments can continue to work with this.
So this is a great way to have these probe points
always be there so you can dynamically turn
on tracing or logging or let your customers do so.
As with all DTrace probes, these are
zero cost when you're not using them.
It's just actually a no op in your code.
A primary distinction between this and the Objective-C
provider is that this provides you a way, because your app,
you've coded into your application the
knowledge that this is a probe point.
Now with the PID in Objective-C Providers, DTrace let's
you record the arguments but your code doesn't know
that the probe is going to be put there so
the kernel says okay, I'll fetch the arguments
and there's no Objective-C runtime
in the kernel, there's no objectives.
We can't extract the descriptions
of Objective-C Objects there.
Whereas with this, you can code in the knowledge
of an Objective-C Object, get it's description,
and be able to record that as an argument.
Because these are coded into your application, or let's
say it's a framework, if you have multiple processes using
that framework, these probe points
are in all those processes.
So you can write your scripts to focus on just
one of those processes or focus on all of them.
So for example, core data has static probes
in it as we ship it with Leopard today.
I can watch all of the begin fetch method calls
or begin fetch operations within core data
by saying CoreData asterisk for the
process ID colon, colon, colon BeginFetch.
So some things to think about as your designing static
probes, you want to think about where the interesting points
in your application that you might
want to probe to see what's happening.
So, for example, you might have a long operation that's
composed of multiple steps, let's say it's three steps,
you might want to record the start
and stop of each one of those steps
so you can see the relative amount
of time that each step takes.
If you've got an activity that has
particular points of interest along the way,
you can have a probe point to record progress for that.
Then you want to think about what arguments to record,
so here you're providing the raw data
for people to be able to consume later.
Think about what data you would want to be
able to report in log messages generated
by a DTrace script that's monitoring your program,
or statistics for graphing in an Xray instrument.
Then in order for your customers, say your internal
developers, to be able to use these probes,
you want to tell people what they actually
are and what the arguments of them are.
So the steps for adding static probes
to a project, we'll go through these.
Number one is to write a provider description file.
Number two would be to import that file,
the header that corresponds to that
into the sources files where you're going to put the probes.
Now the header doesn't actually exist yet.
So the third step is to generate the header file, and
we'll talk about why I'm saying this in this order.
Then the fourth step is to go ahead and
add those probe invocations to your probe.
To take a look at this, I'm going to be using
the grand perspective project as an example.
Some of you may have seen this used earlier in the show.
Grand Perspective let's me point to the directory on my disk
and scan recursively down through all the sub directories,
gather the size of each one of them and
roll that information back up to be able
to report the sizes of any directory in that hierarchy.
So my first step in putting in static probes to monitor
this, I've decided for each directory I want to know the,
when I start the directory and when I end it.
So I put in a probe point for start directory scan and I
want to record the directory path and let's say the depth,
or how deeply nested in the directory hierarchy I am.
When the directory scan finishes, I
should know the size for that directory.
And I'm going to record that in kilobytes.
So I call the provider description file
GrandPerspectiveProbes.d. .d is a standard DTrace suffix,
and in this case .d is a suffix that Xcode knows about.
So a couple of important items here.
When we're recording the probe arguments, these must
actually be C because the header file that gets generated
for this is going to reflect those arguments
and is going to get compiled into your program.
This is the DTrace program itself that's
doing this generation of the header file
so we can record numeric data types like int, short or long.
It actually has a 64 bit space to record each argument.
We can record a char star that's a pointer to a
string out in the user space of the application
or a void star that would be an arbitrary pointer.
So I had mentioned that we provide a way
to look at Cocoa object descriptions.
So I can do that by taking my object, myobj, calling the
description method, that of course I've written on that,
and then making a UTF8String method call
for that so that I can get out a char star
that I can actually pass down into the kernel.
So again, I'm doing the interpretation of
my Cocoa objects up in user space here.
Step two, simply go into the header source code file where
I want to put probe points and import my header file.
Step three, then, is to generate that header file.
Now the reason I imported the header file first is because
this tells Xcode when it does it's dependency scanning,
it says oh, there's a header file here that I don't actually
have, do I have a way to gather this, to generate this?
Oh, okay, I know that for .d files I can generate those
into a header file using this dtrace -h -s command.
So the build system will automatically
generate the header file for you
and then you can use code completion
then to enter in the probe macro names.
If you have a make based project, you
simply add a rule to your Makefile
to put that dtrace -h -s in explicitly.
And that's all you have to do.
The implementation of the header file has macros
in it that have somewhat complex implementation
that give the linker directives of what
information to put in with your binary
so that DTrace will know that these
probes exists in your binary.
So these header files are not really
meant to be human readable.
The primary thing that we're interested in is the
probe macro definitions that they put in there.
So for example, I had written start directory
scan with a char star of the path and the depth.
So the header file contains macros corresponding to
these, the form of the macro names is always going
to be the provider name, which in this case
was GRANDPERSPECTIVE, all in uppercase,
and then _START, _DIRECTORY,
_SCAN.
And you'll notice the second one here, also, which
is GRANDPERSPECTIVE_START_DIRECTORY_SCAN_ENABLED.
So why is that?
Well, we'll talk about that in a couple of minutes.
Okay. Great.
So the fourth step is we go ahead and
add the probe implications to our code.
So in this case, at the top of my method where I'll be
recursively descending down through my directory hierarchy,
this is called for each directory, I
want to put in a probe point to say okay,
I'm starting this directory and here's the depth.
So I'm just going to be kind of extensive about this
and calculate the depth by doing, taking my string,
getting an NS Array of the path
components and getting a count of that.
I could have passed it recursively down
through, but hey, let's take more time.
Then I get my UTF8 path and I make my macro call.
Then at the end of my function, where I've got the
directory size, I make a corresponding call and record that.
The audience says, well Dave, you had
said that these were zero cost probes.
That sure doesn't look zero cost to me.
Well that's what the is enabled probe is all about.
This lets you avoid the expensive cost of any
potential argument marshalling that you want to do
by having a quick test and branch that if the probe is not
actually enabled, it'll just skip right over this code.
When you do enable the probes, then this test will
success and it will go through the argument marshalling
and it will make the corresponding macro call.
So we can see here that it's the same code as before just
using the is enabled to wrap each of the probe points here,
because gee, I want to avoid the cost of that
divide there on the second one there also.
Their size divided by 1024.
Okay. So let's see if the demo gods are
with me to actually show this in action.
Go ahead and hide terminal.
I'll bring up my Grand Perspective project.
So my first step is I'll go down here to other
sources as a place where I want to create my new file.
So I'm going to create an empty file in
the project for the probe descriptions.
So we'll call that GrandPerspectiveProbes.d.
So again, the standard .d suffix.
Finish with that.
Now I magically type in the same thing
that you saw in the slides before,
so start directory scan and end directory scan macros.
All right.
Probe definitions.
Now we'll go ahead and save that.
Make sure we're built.
Okay. Now I want to go up to the source file where
I'm going to want to put these two probe points.
I'll just add in the #import
GrandPerspectiveProbes.h. Save again.
And let's actually bring up the build
panel here so we can see this in action.
And, whoop, okay.
For some reason it's failing the first time around.
But that was actually where it executed
the dtrace -h -s. So anyway,
trust me, it did that on the first build through.
So now the header file exists and I can
start using these probe points in my program.
So I'll go down into the source file, into the
routine that gets called for each directory.
And I'll go down through here to the point where at the
top I've got the full directory path for the directory.
And we'll go ahead and magically
type in our probe definition.
So here again, I'm using the is enabled
probe to test whether it is enabled.
Doing all the expensive argument
marshalling and then calling the macro.
At the bottom of my routine, where I've finished
going through the full directory hierarchy scan
for this directory, I can put in my end directory probe.
So same thing here as you saw before.
Let's go ahead and save and build.
Now if I run this, we can see hey, very nice.
Very nice.
But I'd like to be able to see what's going on there.
So let's actually bring up Xray, I'll choose
the blank template and bring up the library.
Now in the interest of time, I've already created
an Xray instrument that uses these two probe points.
So I've got two probe clauses in my
Grand Perspective Xray instrument.
The first one I named startDirectoryScan.
I call it type custom, because Xray didn't know about it.
The provider name is GrandPerspective, and I use the
star wildcard to indicate that I want to gather this
for all processes that happen to hit this probe.
And then for the first one I say start directory scan
and I record arg0 as the path, arg1 as the depth
and in this case, I'll record a
third argument of the directory size
of zero because I'm just starting the directory.
I don't know what it is yet.
We close that down.
We can take a look at the second one.
Very similar.
I call it endDirectoryScan.
Again, it's custom.
GrandPerspective star, end_Directory_Scan
as the probe name.
So again, this matches what I put
in the provider description files.
This is the lower case version of this.
So I'm recording arg0, the path, arg1,
the depth, and now I do have argument two
on this probe, which is the directory size.
Whoop. So I'm going to go ahead and zoom
this up a little bit so we're seeing that I'd
like to graph both the depth and
the directory size as we go through.
I should be able to attach to the Grand Perspective
project, or application that's already running,
where you can see that the window's still there.
Go ahead and scan the folder again.
The applications folder.
Whoop. It would help to start recording,
as Steve points out.
Scan folder, applications.
All right.
Now we see data coming out and in this
case, the Grand Perspective black screen.
Oh well. We're here to demo the static probes.
So we can see lots of data being gathered as we go through.
At the top we've got, we can see that we're descending
through the directory hierarchy with a depth of two
and start, start, start, finally an
end, where we get the directory size.
We can see the path name on each one
that I've recorded from static probes.
I can go to the end and see that again we descend down
through and finish up slash applications, reports,
the directory size of almost a
gigabyte in slash applications.
I can sort by these various columns and there we go.
Okay. Let's go back to slides please.
So we've seen how you can add static probes to your
project and I mentioned that we're starting to put them
into various places in the system as well.
So we've got static probes in Libsystem, the
plockstat provider is actually one that's documented
in the openSolaris documentation for
DTrace, so this tells us information
about what's going on with locking on our P Threads.
I had mentioned that we've got static probes in core data.
And in Leopard Beta we're shipping the scripting languages
Ruby, Python and Perl with static probes already embedded
in them, so each of these defines
their own provider that you can use.
You can see these using the DTrace
-l command to list the probes.
You can grep for a specific provider
name or for the process ID to filter
down because there's thousands
of probe points on the system.
This is the provider definition file that I've
actually copied out of the core data source code.
We can see that with this we can track the
begin and end activity of fetching, of faulting,
of relationship faulting and of saving in core data.
So you'll notice that that's a .d file because
that's using the d language to define it.
And then here I give an example of
a DTrace script that I could write
that could monitor all core data
activity using those probes.
Again, this is also using the standard .d suffix we
interpret which, whether it's a provider definition
or a script to use these, we interpret that based on the
context you're using it in and the contents, of course.
So in the case of Ruby, this is actually the
most extensive of the scripting languages.
We're taking advantage of some work that was done in
the open source community by a company called Joyer.
We can see function, entry and returns, garbage
collection begin and end, and the create,
the start and finish and freeing of object creation.
So actually, on your systems in developer examples, Ruby,
DTrace, print_calls.d, we have scripts, two scripts there.
This one that shows the entry and return of
all Ruby functions, printing the file name,
the line number, the class and function name.
And this will work for your Cocoa Ruby projects as well.
And then the second one to observe memory usage
so we can track garbage collection begin
and end and object creation and freeing.
So let's go ahead and see a demo of some of
the other static probe activity in the system.
First, I'd like to go up and go ahead and give
you an idea of if I do the pseudo dtrace -l,
in case you missed it in the Steve Peters'
DTrace session yesterday, I'll just execute it.
19,722 probes.
If I grep for just the core data probes, we can see that
there's a lot of processes that are using core data,
so process 1326, 1321, 1237, 183, 176, so all
of these probes are already there in the system.
I could monitor them all at once with one script.
But what I'm going to do is bring
up the group viewer project.
Make sure that that's built.
And this is a simple core databased application.
I'll go into Xray, again, I'll use a blank template
and bring in a core data instrument
that I had previously created.
And in this case, I would also like to
monitor the reads and writes activity.
So if we look at the core data probe instrument here in
DTrace, in Xray, we can see that I've got two probe points
on this, one to watch the begins of fault activity
and one to watch the begins of fetch activities.
In each case I record the string that is the
URI of the object ID of the object in question.
So I can go ahead and launch the group viewer executable
from Xray and bring up a sample document in it.
And we can see that we had a fair amount of
read and write activity at the start of it
and there was also a delay when we open that window up.
Now, as I scroll through my list of members, I can start
to see core data activity as we begin faulting operations
to bring in the member data as I
was scrolling through the list.
So that's kind of interesting.
Lots of read write activity at the start.
Fetching activity or faulting activity later on.
So if you saw my demo on Monday, you might recognize
that we had in the interests of prematurely optimizing
to give the user good user experience, we had actually
prefetched all this data when we loaded the document
so that it would be there when you needed it.
But as our customers started using larger
files, that started to be a performance hit
and maybe we can do something about that.
So if I go back into the project, and in
this case, my window has the lists in it,
the lists are backed by array controllers
that have SQL Light activity.
I can take a new advantage of a new feature in
Leopard that we've added to the core data array,
all the controllers in core data,
and this is use lazy fetching.
So I'll go ahead and turn on lazy fetching and build.
Now let's go through this again to
see if we get any different behavior.
So make sure that GroupViewer is not running.
Okay. Go ahead and run a second time through.
Load up our document.
Much less read write activity up front.
I didn't show it before, but we probably had over 10,000.
Over 10,000 reads and writes up front here.
We had 206.
I go back to GroupViewer, scroll through the list again.
Now we can see that as I'm doing my faulting in core
data, it's reading the data in just when I need it.
So you can see the correlation of static
probes that we can define with semantic meaning
and some of these system probes that are in the system.
So you can do that for your apps as well.
Okay? So let's go back to slides.
So to recap, for adding static probes to your project,
you would write the provider description file,
you would import the corresponding header file
in the source code where you need that header,
number three would generate the provider header
file, which XCode will do automatically for you,
and number four you would add the
probe invocation macros to your code.
So on the provider description file you
do need to make sure that that is a file
that is in the source target for your project.
So in this session we've taken a look, another look, at
the power of Xray in DTrace and the power of them combined.
We've looked at building customer DTrace instruments.
We've seen a variety of kind of advanced ways
to invoke Xray for specialized circumstances.
And we've seen how you can extend the power of this
system by instrumenting your own code with static probes.
So for more information you can
contact our developer tools evangelist,
Matt Formica, or
consult the documentation websites.
You can look at the DTrace documentation
up on Sun's BigAdmin website.
Just Google for that.